Instructions (#17)
scalacenter/snake-workshop: website/docs/snake/step-by-step.md

height).

The goal of this workshop is to implement the `updateGame` function which,
provided the previous state of the game and the action of the player, returns
the next state of the world.

The code in `Launcher.scala` creates a fresh world and every 250 milliseconds
calls `nextWorld`.

### The grid

The game can be represented as a table, or grid. Each element of the grid can be
empty, occupied by a fruit or by a block of the snake.  The dimensions of the
grid are specified in the `size` attribute of the case class
(`world.size.width`, `world.size.height`):

 - `height` is the number of rows of the grid. We will use of the convention of naming `y` the variables indicating vertical position
 - `width` is the number of columns of the grid. We will use of the convention of naming `x` the variables indicating horizontal position
 - The top left corner of the grid has position `(x=0, y=0)`
 - The top right corner of the grid has position `(x=width-1, y=0)`
 - The bottom left corner of the grid has position `(x=0, y=height-1)`
 - The bottom right corner of the grid has position `(x=width-1, y=height-1)`

![the grid](/img/snake/grid.png)

> 

Reviewer: Add a part to explain what a `Snake` is: a head, a tail and a direction

# Workshop instructions

## Structure

The code is written in three files:

 - `src/main/scala/Snake.scala`: logic of the game, **you will work only this file**
 - `src/main/scala/Launcher.scala`: logic to start the game. This file is provided

>  - `src/main/scala/Draw.scala`: logic to draw the terrain and snake on the screen. This file is provided

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - `src/main/scala/Painter.scala`: logic to draw the terrain and snake on the screen. This file is provided
```

>  - `index.html`: the web page that contains the game. Open this file in Firefox/Chrome/Safari to play

Reviewer 2: need a line above here for `src/main/scala/ContextHolder.scala`, with description maybe like
`logic to assist the Painter. This file is provided`

Author: I agree. What do you think about moving `ContextHolder` into `Painter`? It is unnecessary complexity that participants do not need to see

Reviewer 2: yup that works for me

## How to compile and run

 1. Start a `sbt` shell. 
 2. To run the game, execute the task `fastLinkJS`. This will compile the Scala code into a Javascript file which you can find in `target/scala-3.0.2/snake-fastopt/main.js`.
 3. Open `index.html` in your browser of choice, this file loads the Javascript produced in the previous step and runs it.

## Logic overview

The state of the game at any given time is represented by the `World` case class

```scala
case class World(snake: Snake, fruit: Fruit, size: Size)
```

in other words, each object of type `World` is a photograph of the state of the
game. It contains a snake, a fruit, and the dimensions of the world (width and
height).

> A snake is made up of blocks, or nodes. Each node has `x` and `y` coordinates.

Reviewer 2: I think it could be confusing to refer to both blocks and nodes

provided the previous state of the game and the action of the player, returns
the next state of the world.

The code in `Launcher.scala` creates a fresh world and every 250 milliseconds
calls `nextWorld`.

### The grid

The game can be represented as a table, or grid. Each element of the grid can be
empty, occupied by a fruit or by a block of the snake.  The dimensions of the
grid are specified in the `size` attribute of the case class
(`world.size.width`, `world.size.height`):

 - `height` is the number of rows of the grid. We will use of the convention of naming `y` the variables indicating vertical position
 - `width` is the number of columns of the grid. We will use of the convention of naming `x` the variables indicating horizontal position
 - The top left corner of the grid has position `(x=0, y=0)`
 - The top right corner of the grid has position `(x=width-1, y=0)`
 - The bottom left corner of the grid has position `(x=0, y=height-1)`
 - The bottom right corner of the grid has position `(x=width-1, y=height-1)`

![the grid](/img/snake/grid.png)

### A World example

![world example](/img/snake/worldexample.png)

> ## Part 1: growing the snake

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Part 1: Growing the snake
```

Here you will implement the eating logic of the snake.  If the snake's head

> comes in contact with the fruit, then it grows of one block.  To check if the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
comes in contact with the fruit, then its tail grows one block in length.  To check if the
```

> head (a `Block`) is contact with the fruit, we can compare it with the position

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
head (a `Block`) is in contact with the fruit, we can compare it with the position
```

> of the fruit (a `Block` as well.).  Remark that we compare two objects with the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of the fruit (its underlying `Block`).  Remark that we are comparing two objects with the
```

is `false` you need to implement the movement logic described above. Make sure
you have a look at the [Scala basics] page to know how to manipulate lists.

## Part 2: Reacting to player's input

You will now implement two functions, `opposite` and `nextDirection` so that you
can modify the direction of movement of the snake when the player changes it
with the arrow keys.

Start with `opposite`, which you will need for `nextDirection`. This function
returns the direction which is opposite to the one it receives. So for example
if it receives `Direction.Left` it will produce `Direction.Right`.  Use pattern
matching (as described in [Scala basics])

After that you can move to `nextDirection`. Here you will use pattern matching again,
this time on `Option`, to compute the next direction of the snake.
If the user changed the direction, then `inputDirection` will be `Some(...)` and you need
to adopt the direction in it. Otherwise you maintain (return) the current direction.

You need to be careful: at any time the snake can adopt three new directions,
**the head cannot go inside the body**. If the user requests this impossible

> direction,you will keep the current direction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
direction, you must keep the current direction.
```

![not all directions are possible](/img/snake/nextdirection.png)

## Part 3: Moving the head

In this part you will work on the `nextHead` function. Its goal is to create the
new head of the `snake` it receives as argument. The position of the new head
will depend on the argument `nextDirection`. You will create a new `Block` with
the `x` and `y` attributes derived from those of the head of the snake.

> Remember the example grid at the benning of this page: going right means

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Remember the example grid at the beginning of this page: going right means
```

increasing the `x` component while the `y` component stays unchanged; going down
means increasing the `y` component while the `x` component stays unchanged.

> After that implement the `wrapY` function, similarly to the `wrapX` above it.

Reviewer 2: shouldn't `wrapY` be done before `nextHead`?

Reviewer 2: I think maybe the user could remember about the world boundaries and implement their own logic to wrap coordinates, before you tell them that there are already functions for them to use

Author: It looked simpler to me to first have an implementation and then have them tweak it for the new need. Otherwise it seems very "abstract" and I do not think they will consider wrapping.
But I understand your point, I can change if you prefer

This functions is needed so that when the snake goes against the top border of
the grid, it appears on the bottom of the grid going up.  You can see an example
of the `wrapX` function:

![wrapx](/img/snake/wrapx.png)

You can now use the `wrapY` and `wrapX` functions in `nextHead`.

[Scala basics]: ../scala-basics.md

## Part 4: Updating the Snake

You now have all the functions required to update the direction, head and tail
of the snake.  Use them in `nextSnake` to create the snake updated for the next

> period.

Reviewer 2: is there a reminder needed about combining head and tail to the body?

## Part 5: Updating the world

The only moving parts of `World` are `snake` and `fruit`. In parts 1 to 4 you

> developed the tools to detect if the snake is eating and to update it.  Use them

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
developed the tools to detect if the snake is eating and to update its attributes.  Use them
```

in `nextWorld` to update the snake.

You also need to update the fruit: if the snake ate it, create a new one using

> the provided function `createRandomFruit`, otherwise you can reuse the existing

Reviewer 2: We were assuming that the student would implement `createRandomFruit`

Author: I did not have the same assumption. What do you prefer?

fruit.

> With the new snake and new fruit, you can return a new `World`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the new snake and new fruit, you can return a new `World` (its size remains unchanged).
```
